Movie Reviews
korean movie reviews
The box movie
was directed by Yang Jung-Woong, who hasn’t had other works prior to this film. And the director isn’t the only one in his professional role for the first time, as Chanyeol of EXO is also acting in a feature film as the main lead for the first time as well! He’s joined by Cho Dal-Hwan, who’s a seasoned veteran in the field. It’s great to see more and more idols getting the opportunity to act in feature films, and I think this was a great opportunity for Chanyeol to gain experience
The synopsis is as follows:
A washed-up former hit producer, Min-Soo, coincidentally discovers a young male, Ji Hoon, singing and playing the guitar, and he’s instantly mesmerized by his potential. He aspires to get Ji Hoon to become a singer, but there’s just one problem: Ji Hoon gets extreme stage fright. However, Min-Soo can’t give up on the potential that Ji Hoon has, and so they sign a contract to have Ji Hoon perform 10 times in various locations, while being inside a refrigerator box. And so, the two leave on a nation-wide tour to get Ji Hoon’s name out, and possibly cure his fear of the stage.
To start off, the intro of the movie was a quick and simple background introduction to the film. It was in a time lapse format that was very effective and delivered its story well. And its not just the format of the intro that I enjoyed, but I loved the camerawork the film had too. It was very cinematic and was like a musical show or theater; very Broadway-esque at times.

Also, there were lots of cameo appearances and familiar faces in the film. Within just 5 minutes of the movie, we see our first cameo appearance of Gaeko from Dynamic Duo. I was really surprised to see him on the big screen, and he covered the song “Bad Guy” by Billie Eilish. His remix was absolutely fire. There also were special appearances from Jung Hae-Gyun, as well as the comedian Kang Jae-Jun. It was fun to spot and find familiar faces throughout the film. Oh, and the movie also didn’t forget to sprinkle in humor every here and there, which I appreciated.
As for his acting, I’m divided – so I’ll explain both here and in the bad parts. As for what was good, he didn’t have much dialogue in the first half or so of the film, as the character he plays is a fairly quiet one, so you can’t really judge his “acting” overall based on that. However, the role fit him well. He felt natural and the character felt like him himself; so in a way, I guess that means the role suited him well, and he played it and executed the role naturally. I think it was a good start for him in acting in feature films, and I expect this movie to be a good catalyst for him. The film will definitely gain international recognition with EXO fans and just K-pop fans in general, and this was a good movie to launch his movie acting career with.